you already know I like to talk about
issues in a spontaneous way I like to
talk about politically loaded heavy deep
complex issues in a spontaneous way
which is not knowing what you got on the
internet it's not on what you get in
peer-reviewed academic papers or
presented at conferences so this is a
video I plan to make months ago we've
been so busy especially just dealing
with life career education travel type
of things and now I'm gonna sneeze to
symbolically appropriate sneeze
indicating how busy where I said okay
I'm not gonna make any more videos but
Aristotle until we fly to France and fly
back from France but just now I thought
you know what why don't I sit now and do
a super spontaneous video on aerosol and
from my perspective it's gonna be more
enjoyable and interesting because I
haven't been thinking about this row
been not thinking about it for long
enough that I'm not really burdened with
all of the reading and research at it
before because I did do a lot of reading
not just inside the primary source text
here but of various academic articles em
so I'm going to kick this off by stating
what the puzzle is that Aristotle has
left us about his most fundamental and
obvious belief about democracy and
dictatorship you could also Express this
as polity and monarchy but however you
want to put it whether a city-state
like Athens should be ruled by the
masses or should be ruled by just one
man what really is is position that's
now hey it's it's a big book right
Aristotle's politics it's big and it's
been translated many times in study
women scholars how could this possibly
be ambiguous well my own conclusion is
that this has everything to do with the
fact that the conclusion of the book is
missing and part of the dramatization of
his argument part of his attempt to make
his argument interesting and enticing is
that he was intentionally being a bit
ambivalent and big and ambiguous
in several stages leading up to his Shah
in conclusion so say more with that the
conclusion of my own video here and for
me there's a really interesting and
really provocative but ultimately non
explanatory observation in pointing out
the extent to which Aristotle was done
Tonto a secret agent of macedon of
Macedonia
so in this political period Athens is
one country and Macedonia is another and
there is a very overt military as well
as political struggle for which is to be
the dominant power not just over Greece
but over a large part of the known world
from the perspective of Greece and
generally speaking during Aristotle's
lifetime the power of Macedonia was
increasing and increasing but not
steadily so not predictably so if you
were living through a period of time at
many points it would not have been
obvious that Alexander the Great
would become the only name remembered by
history from papal century which he
almost is Aristotle's name also is
remembered and if you don't know there
is indeed an historical connection
between Aristotle and Alexander the
Great a connection that is as well
proven as anything from this period of
history can be so what's the mystery I
mean this is not george RR martin this
is supposedly not written in riddles
right this is a thesis and a morality
lecture that's telling us what we ought
to think and what we ought to believe so
we it ought to be clearer it ought to be
clear as day and not clear as mud but
what it is is clear as mud okay so I'm
reading from about section 1287 B so
what I'm saying to a section 1287 this
is ultimately the manuscript pagination
you can use this to find the correct
page and every any given translation or
addition in any language English Greek
French whatever other or translation you
have to have so using that Universal
number system we're starting around
twelve eighty seven to twelve eighty
eight here okay when it happens that the
whole of a family
or even a single person is of Merit so
outstanding as to surpass the merit of
all the rest it is only just that this
family should be vested with kingship
and absolute sovereignty or that this
single person should become a king and
absolute sovereign okay pause so if we
just read you that that sentence anyone
would be within the rights to say oh
whoa Aristotle clearly supports
dictatorship whether its monarchy or
some other kind of situation like having
one king rule that's completely clear
but probably all of you watching this
video know in some broad sense Aristotle
is remembered as a philosopher of
democracy and to some extent by and for
democracy so I'm now just gonna skip a
couple of sentences really so still on
the same page were around 1288 in the
original pagination skipping just a
couple of sentences down the same page
he then says quote it would be no less
improper to require him to take his turn
at being a subject under a system of
rotation a hole is never intended by
nature to be inferior to a part and a
man so greatly superior to others stands
to them in the relation of a hole to its
parts okay so this is the bizarre claim
not that democracy is the hole and say
the president the one leader of the
democracy is the part it's saying that
the individual man the monarch or
dictator who's so superior everywhere
else that he is the pole hole and that
the rest of his whole society are merely
his parts so this this sounds like an
extreme a surreal I mean it seems like
he's joking especially if you read the
whole text or a larger part of those
things okay so now I'm switching to a
completely different part of the text so
many many many pages later
elsewhere on the text and this is not
the only contrast you should make but
this is this is one extreme contrast
okay so quote oh right sorry and this is
now 1332 there abouts 1332 - 1335 and
the original pagination okay we may
imagine one set of circumstances in
which it would be obviously better that
a lasting distinction should once and
for all be established between
governor's and those who are governed
this would be if there were one class
and this is in the state one class of
people surpassing all others as much as
gods and heroes are supposed to safar
supposed to surpass mankind
sorry to misspeak there a class of man
so outstanding physically as well as
mentally that their superiority of the
ruling stock was indisputably clear to
their subjects but that is a difficult
assumption to make and we have nothing
in actual life like the gulf between
Kings and subjects which the writer psy
lacks describes as existing in India we
may therefore draw the conclusion which
can be defended on many grounds that all
should share alike in a system of
government under which they rule and are
ruled by turns in a society of peers
equality means that all should have the
same rights and a constitution can
hardly survive if it is founded on
injustice and the editor here adds that
the clear meaning is that you cannot
have a constitution that gives different
rights to men who are fundamentally of
the same quality who are fundamentally
equal which is the the situation in
reality so who we here are they somewhat
bizarre or clarification the first
passage I read states that in theory it
would be perfectly acceptable or even
preferable to have a society where men
are ruled over supey a superior fam
who is so superior over the the subjects
that it's like the comparison between
gods and normal man and of course this
is ancient ancient Greece so you know
what type of gods they're talking about
and he specifies physically as well as
mentally you know the statues it's fun
and you might wonder well this is a
period of time when he basically serves
Alexander the Great does he have in mind
that Alexander the Great is one of these
godlike kings and then we have a
separate passage we contrast this to
where this is laughed at and scorned as
being completely ridiculous
apparently some other author named
skylax says that that's the case in
India that in India the rulers are
totally superior to people being ruled
well why don't some Greek who managed to
travel all the way to India and back and
survived to tell the tale well yeah
maybe they say that about India but let
me tell you in in reality he says in
actuality there is no such condition in
the real world
in reality all of us in Athens are equal
so therefore we must have democracy and
his idea of democracy one of the
fundamental concepts for him
maybe not for our sighted a is just a
replacement and rotation that today
you're on the judge today you're the
judge in court next year you're a member
of the jury the year after that you're
the person being judged in the same way
it really is the jury more than the the
presidency I think that he has in mind
the idea of everyone participating by
turns one at a time I'm now gonna read
really quickly um some brief comments
from this article of this is a
traditional conventional academic
peer-reviewed article titled on
Aristotle's critique of Athenian
democracy and I'm gonna tell you why I
think this is significant but ultimately
kind of irrelevant and distracting
observation of this other big question
and maybe you'd imagine this explains
why why does Aristotle take this strong
but paradoxical position on democracy
versus monarchy however we're gonna put
it ok quote the third reason stems you
can tell we're starting a midstream here
we're not starting on page one we're
already on the third reason you don't
get to hear the first two reasons go
read the whole article if you want to
read on
the third reason stems from Aristotle's
25-year opposition to Athenian policy
towards Macedon and the consequent
precariousness of his position in Athens
it is not surprising that he held Athens
leaders in low regard it is not
surprising that he considered Athens an
extreme democracy governed by low birth
low-income and vulgarity the choice of
words here differs a bit from
translation to translation but what he
is hinting at when he says in some
editions it is bracketed by some editors
many of the people who translated this
into English and modern languages are so
shocked by how harsh the wording is here
that they put in brackets just to
suggest that this must have been added
by some other author or this must be a
corruption of the test they're just in
disbelief they cannot believe that
Aristotle's words against democracy or
this harsh and are this extreme that's
just an editorial it's a human reaction
it's an emotional reaction there's no
scientific evidence for this there's no
basis for this they're just shocked so
again the wording is even harsher than
it sounds here
it's it's governed by vulgar idiots you
know this is what he's saying about
Athens well believe it I mean again even
the two pastors just read you know I
think it is fair to say that Aristotle
has mixed feelings and mixed emotions
and a rubber
Athens was not paradise for
intellectuals Athens killed Socrates and
everyone was still in its shadow most of
all people like Plato and Aristotle
Aristotle was basically never allowed to
go downtown he was a second-class
citizen he was a medic so his school was
located outside of the symbolic city
walls but there were a lot of
institutions in Athens I believe he was
never allowed to set foot in maybe he
was given a tour at some point but he
was a second-class citizen in Athens
himself and as we're gonna read here
there was this question towards than he
supported Alexander the Great Alexander
of Macedon at a time when really Athens
was fighting for its survival against
Alexander of Macedon it is not
surprising that he would have preferred
to empower in a lead of educated
gentlemen who would have neither
squandered Athens resources on a warth
Macedon nor persecuted philosophy
moreover he was not alone in this
position in the 350s and 340s i Socrates
this is not Socrates if you're reading
on-screen I sokrat he's if you prefer
with an eye at the front had advocated a
more elitist government for Athens under
the title of an aerial peg 8 or
ancestral Constitution like Aristotle he
also courted the Macedonian King Philip
and so for that matter to the head of
the Academy a specific very approximate
translation from someone who never
studied ancient Greek many if not most
of Athens leading intellectuals had
broken with democracy and were in favor
of Macedonian hegemony well many if not
most is quite a claim you see there was
a footnote there this is based on which
texts of survived history
Aristotle was employed for six years as
tutor to King Philip's son Alexander a
decade later Alexander took two of
Aristotle's nephews calisthenics and
Nicanor on his expedition against Persia
they had served respectively as an
official historian and a general
meanwhile aerosol had become a close
friend of the man whom Alexander left
behind to govern Macedonia and to keep
watch on Greece the formidable Antipater
who would be the executor of Aristotle's
last will and testament that is a
document that survives history so we
know what it says in Aristotle's last
will and testament and that it names
this historical figure and establishes
thus that the tight political
cooperation personal and political
relationship between the two men
Aristotle left behind correspondence
with Philip Alexander and Antipater so
if you don't know Philip of Macedon was
the King of Macedonia and it was the
father of Alexander the Great and then
Alexander the Great
took over Philip was in fact
assassinated although little of it
survives today arizo also had close ties
to the tyrant of Eternia in the trode
one hermaeus whose kingdom he lived in
for three years following his departure
from Athens and 348 blah blah blah let's
skip a little bit here Aristotle first
came to Athens to study in 367 and did
not leave until 348
he did not return until 3:35 and stayed
until his exile in 323 it has usually
been thought that Aristotle left Athens
in 348 following the death of Plato and
Aristotle failure to be chosen as a
successor at the head of the Academy it
has been plausibly argued however that
Aristotle was constrained to leave
before Plato's death
we dated to early 347 because of the
ante Macedonian sentiment following
Philips destruction of Olympus we do
have historical records on this event it
was indeed a kind of bloody and shocking
massacre sort of situation stirred up a
lot of anti Macedonian Empire sentiment
people seem to have less trouble
approving of an empire when it's
massacring other people far away and
have difficulty reconciling themselves
to it when it's massacring your own
people right at home and Alexander the
Great's Empire did both and it's also
very plausible that in an earlier period
of his life
Aristotle might have been making excuses
for Alexander in a later period of life
maybe he started to see the wisdom of
having the democratic system or
something like it something vaguely
Democratic in some sense that he saw
working in Athens
it is certainly striking that Aristotle
did not return to Athens until 335 when
Alexander had just put down an anti
Macedonian rebellion in the Greek
city-states and that he left Athens
again precisely in 323 when the news of
the death of Alexander the Great
occasioned a second 80 Macedonian revolt
also known as the lamian war so the
picture that emerges therefore is of a
wealthy man who came from a city nearly
1,000 miles away from Athens he had
inherited a connection to the Macedonian
royal court which he energetically
pursued thus placing himself in
opposition to the political tenancy that
dominated Athens for most of his adult
life so we have here a vision of
Aristotle torn between two very powerful
political tendencies and
this produced I don't know should I use
the term cognitive dissonance it
produced some mixed feelings his
political writings I when you have these
contradictory extreme impulses in the
politics of Aristotle I don't think one
is sincere and one is insincere I think
he means both I think he kind of yearns
for contradictory and unattainable
things and the other big story that's
going on here could be a separate video
I guess in many ways what he's trying to
do is guilt
Plato off of his throne Plato's writing
on politics is garbage I have actually
read Plato's laws most people haven't a
very long and boring book this does
directly criticize and pillory Plato's
laws it criticizes many contemporary
authors some of whom their workers no
longer extent except for his criticism
of them but like Plato the one thing he
has in common with Plato is the hope
that in future the government will take
over the role of defining controlling
and guiding public education and that's
the conclusion the whole book is
building towards and it's the conclusion
that's missing the way forward the
fundamental solution to the riddle of
both Athenian politics and the larger
scale Greek politics that were at that
time dominated by Macedonia in his
opinion is improving the system of
education in a sense creating a system
of education in a country that had no
system of education people just use
private tutors there were no government
schools there was nothing like that
there was government military service
but it was military service only all of
his hope for the future of Athenian
democracy or dictatorship or both is
placed in a dream of public education
and in that sense I think he felt he was
completing the mission that started with
Socrates carried on in a much
transformed vehicle in the philosophy of
Plato
and he was bringing it to its true and
final conclusion that is exactly the
conclusion of the book were lacking
today and that's what allows him to have
these contradictory statements one of
the most famous things one of the first
things I was told about Aristotle was
that his view was that democracy was one
of the worst forms of government and you
can find isolated passages saying that
but you could also find long substantive
positive passages both here in the
politics and in a separate work that's
called the constitution of Athens I
think I got that right here sir here
titled the Athenian Constitution long
passionate seemingly sincere passages
talking about all the advantages of
democracy how it works so much better
than monarchy or dictatorship or tyranny
or what-have-you and giving all kinds of
practical advice for how to improve
democracy on a case-by-case basis um I
guess you can say ultimately it lets him
wiggle out of recommending any one form
of government it lets him wiggle out of
committing to support Alexander the
Great at a time when everyone including
his own blood relatives his own father
his own political connections his direct
relationship with the man who was
appointed dictator of that part of
Greece who was the executor of his will
and his personal friend everyone was
expecting him to univocal ii and
enthusiastically endorsed Alexander the
Great as king and he shows a fair bit of
moral courage in refusing to do that but
he doesn't really show enough moral
courage to go all the way in opposing
via the rule of Alexander the Great
instead what we get is him vesting all
of his hopes in education okay guys
that's 20 minutes I know this video is
not gonna be popular with my audience I
know I'd get more viewers more
appreciation if I just talked about the
themes you guys are already expecting me
to hear but ultimately I have a
commitment to provide a higher level of
substance even if I'm the only one in
watching this video when I come back to
look at what my life was maybe 20 years
from now what it was I learned at age 40
when I remained like Aristotle a
perpetual student learning new things
right up until my death
[Music]